Doozy bit of cricket from Bairstow: Michael Atherton after Englishman’s controversial run out by Alex Carey in Ashes

Controversy erupted during the heated final day of the second Ashes Test match when Jonny Bairstow was adjudged run out after he might have presumed that the ball was dead after he left it and it went straight to the keeper.

The incident occurred in the final ball of the 52nd over when Bairstow left a bouncer from Cameron Green and then walked out of his crease, thinking it was the end of the over. Wicketkeeper Alex Carey, however, hit the stumps and Australia appealed. There was a check from the third umpire and the Englishman was ultimately adjudged to be out.

Before leaving Bairstow and captain Ben Stokes exchanged words with the Aussie players, clearly not happy with the decision. Bairstow left the field and Stuart Broad, coming on visibly shaking his head, replaced him in the middle as boos rang around the iconic Lord’s.
According to the laws of the game, “The ball shall be considered to be dead when it is clear to the bowler’s end umpire that the fielding side and both batters at the wicket have ceased to regard it as in play.”
Commentator Michael Atherton said it was “a doozy bit of cricket from Bairstow.” Former Australia captain Ricky Ponting said, “It’s a stumping, not a run-out – enough said. Jonny did the wrong thing and he’s paid with losing his wicket in an Ashes Test match,” while former England captain Eoin Morgan also echoed his thoughts, saying, “Bairstow ducks, the ball is still active. He goes walking down the wicket and is out. It’s smart work by Carey.”

Former Australia cricketer Mark Taylor said, “Carey doesn’t wait for Bairstow to walk out, he’s going to do that regardless. It doesn’t look good and people aren’t going to be happy about it, but it’s the right decision.”

This was just another in the latest string of controversial decision in this Test with England’s Ben Duckett not given out at the fag end of Day 4 after Mitchell Starc had taken the catch.

Having almost reached the pavilion, Duckett was sent back as video replays showed that Starc had not had ‘complete control of body and ball’ prompting boos from Australia’s fans and chuntering from the players.

“In relation to the below incident, Law 33.3 clearly states that a catch is only completed when the fielder has ‘complete control over the ball and his/her own movement.’ The ball cannot touch the ground before then,” the statement said. “In this particular incident, Mitchell Starc was still sliding as the ball rubbed the ground, therefore he was not in control of his movement,” it said.
