 
Drugs approved a decade ago can cure hepatitis C, but most infected Americans still can’t get them, study shows

For a decade now, the world has had highly effective medications for hepatitis C infections. In the United States, they’ve mostly been sitting on the shelf, according to a new study.

These drugs, called direct-acting antivirals because they block proteins the virus needs to copy itself, have been hailed as one of the greatest achievements in modern medicine.

Sold as pills, these drugs are easy to take with almost no side effects and cure an astonishing 95% of the patients who take them.

They are so effective that when the first of these therapies was approved in 2013, doctors looked forward to the day that hepatitis C - then the leading cause of liver transplants in the US - might be relegated to the medical history books. Indeed, one country - Egypt, which had one of the highest rates of hepatitis C in the world - has already eradicated the disease, which can also lead to liver cancer, liver failure and death.

Instead, these therapies - which debuted with list prices of around $90,000 for a course of treatment and once topped the list of the most expensive drugs sold in this country - have become stark examples of one of the worst inequities of this nation’s health care system: Though the U.S. is a world leader in developing new medicines, American patients, who pay more than twice as much for prescription drugs as patients in 32 other wealthy countries, are often unable to afford them.

“Today nearly 15,000 Americans die annually from hepatitis C,” said Dr. Jonathan Mermin, director of the National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“These deaths could have been prevented. Thousands of people are dying every year in our country and many more are suffering from an infection that has been curable for over 10 years,” Mermin said in a news briefing.

Using testing data from Quest Diagnostics, a large commercial laboratory, researchers were able to track the fates of 1 million Americans diagnosed with hepatitis C infections in the decade since the most effective drugs were introduced.

Overall, just 1 in 3 were cured over that time period.

Cure rates differed by age and insurance coverage. Younger patients and those with little or no insurance coverage were less likely to be cured compared with older patients and those with more generous benefits.

Only 25% of people under age 40 were cured compared with 42% of adults over age 60.

Less than 1 in 4 (23%) of people without insurance were classified as cured in the study compared with almost 2 in 5 (40%) of people with commercial insurance and nearly half (45%) of people on Medicare.

Patients who were both younger and uninsured were the least likely to be cured: Just 1 in 6 under 40 without insurance reached this target.

Dr. Frances Collins, a special adviser to President Biden and former director of the National Institutes of Health, called the new numbers “truly discouraging after all these years where the cure has been available.”

“This is not something that a technologically advanced country should be able to just look at and say that’s fine,” Collins said. “It’s not fine.”